# California Consumer Privacy Act, 2018

Notes about California Consumer Privacy Act, 2018

## Sections

- [California Consumer Privacy Act, 2018](#california-consumer-privacy-act-2018)
  - [Sections](#sections)
  - [Notes](#notes)
  - [Consumer rights](#consumer-rights)
  - [Jurisdiction](#jurisdiction)
  - [Violation](#violation)
  - [TODO](#todo)
  - [Coverage](#coverage)
  - [Privacy provisions](#privacy-provisions)
  - [Security effects](#security-effects)
  - [Additional Notes](#additional-notes)
    - [Resources](#resources)

## Notes

- professional standard of care
- reasonable security
- commercially reasonable security
- holistic process

## Consumer rights

- Allows california consumers to demand to see all data an entity has on them, and a full list of 3rd parties the data is shared with.
- Allows for private and class-action litigation for breach of privacy guidelines. Consumer must give 30 day written notice for resolution.
- Consumers can use clearly visible footer on websites to opt out of data sharing. Lack of footer allows consumer to sue.

## Jurisdiction

Any of the following conditions must be satisfied for an entity to come under purview of this law.

- Entities that have $25 million in annual revenue.
- Have data on at least 50,000 people.
- Collect half of their revenues from the sale of personal data.

## Violation

- Companies have 30 days to comply once notified of a violation.
- Fines up to $7,500 per record for issue non-resolution.
- Litigation both private and class action for damages and courts can offer injunctive or declaratory or any other relief deemed proper by the court.
- Litigation penalties of $100 to $750 per consumer per incident, or actual damages.
- Along with other breach related costs such as brand destruction, IT and forensic response and recovery, legal, PR, and consumer notification it can cause existential threats to a business.

## TODO

- Unauthorized access can occur through breach, exfiltration, theft, or _"disclosure as a result of the business’ violation of the duty to implement and maintain reasonable security procedures and practices appropriate to the nature of the information to protect the personal information"_.

## Coverage

- PII such as name, nicknames, addresses, any unique personal identifiers, online identifier IP address, email, account names, SSN, government issued ID such as drivers licenses, passports, etc., professional or employment related information, educational information that is not publicly available.
- Any categories of personal information related to protected classifications under California or Federal law.
- Commercial information, including records of personal property, products or services purchased, obtained, or considered, or other purchasing or consuming histories or tendencies.
- Biometric, geolocation, audio, electronic, visual, thermal, olfactory, and similar information collected by the entity.
- Internet or other electronic network activity information, including, but not limited to, browsing history, search history, and information regarding a consumer’s interaction with an Internet Web site, application, or advertisement.
- Inferences drawn from any of the above information, including to create a profile about a consumer reflecting the consumer’s preferences, characteristics, psychological trends, preferences, predispositions, behavior, attitudes, intelligence, abilities, and aptitudes.

## Privacy provisions

- Consumers can opt out of data sharing with 3rd parties.
- Consumers can find out what information is being collected about them.
- Companies must separate the data according to the user preferences.
- Companies cannot refuse equitable and equal services, they can only offer incentives.
- Companies must disclose and deliver the requested information within 45 days of a request from the consumer. Disclosure involves the types of information, was it sold or shared with 3rd parties and to whom, identification (name and address) information of 3rd parties who received the data over the last 12 months.

## Security effects

- Businesses are not required to report breaches.
- Private data must be secured.
- Access to data must be properly secured.
- Consumers must be verified before their data is shared with them.
- Important to examine how data is collected, how it is stored and transmitted, analyzed, secured, and distributed, and whether some data collection could be stopped.
- External factors such as data exfiltration due to contractor negligence or malpractice, third-party compromise, and external cyber threats—they might be out of direct influence of the entity, but they can still cause the business to come under scrutiny and be subject to penalties.
- Data stored across different countries and cloud services, data shared with partners and third-party vendors, and data ingested from vendors and consumers must all be secured to the same standard. Partners and 3rd party must share the same security standards as the entity, and due diligence must be performed instead of moving on blind trust.
- Data flows should be limited where unnecessary, and where data is collected, stored, and moved for any purpose must be tracked and examined constantly.
- Data in non-production environments should be synthetic, to minimize risk of exposure.

## Additional Notes

### Resources

- [California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA): What you need to know to be compliant](https://www.csoonline.com/article/3292578/california-consumer-privacy-act-what-you-need-to-know-to-be-compliant.html)
- [The CCPA is an opportunity to get your data security house in order](https://www.csoonline.com/article/3526495/the-ccpa-is-an-opportunity-to-get-your-data-security-house-in-order.html)
